AccidentalStudies/README.md, before:

# AccidentalStudies

This directory contains all the results from measuring the accidentals for the 2015 and 2016 runs and the scripts used to plot these results. (The 2016 study for optimizing the mask size with respect to accidental rates is in the `MaskStudies/` directory; see that directory for documentation of that study.) Here's a quick rundown of the basic procedure.

1) Run `MeasureAccidentals`. You need at least five arguments: the slink file, the gain cal fits file, the alignment file, the track distributions file, and the fill number.

   For the 2015 accidental analysis, the gain cal file used was `GainCal/GainCalFits_20150923.225334.dat`, the alignment file used was `ALIGNMENT/Trans_Alignment_4449.dat`, and the track distributions file was `TrackDistributions/TrackDistributions_MagnetOn.txt`. (For magnet-off calibrations, those latter two files were `ALIGNMENT/Trans_Alignment_4341.dat` and `TrackDistributions/TrackDistributions_MagnetOff_4341.txt` respectively.)

   For the 2016 accidental analysis, the files used are `GainCal/GainCalFits_20160501.155303.dat`, `ALIGNMENT/Trans_Alignment_4892.dat`, and `TrackDistributions/TrackDistributions_MagnetOn2016_4892.txt`.

   If this is a regular fill, you don't need a sixth argument; it will measure the accidental rate in five-minute steps. If this is a VdM or other special fill, specify a timestamp file as the sixth argument, so that it will measure the accidental rate for each step of the scan. You can make this timestamp file from a VdM csv file by using `scripts/extractVDMTimestamps.py` on the online machines (although you'll need to edit to remove the separation column, which is included for reference), or just make it by hand (fun).

   Sample invocation for a regular 2016 fill (4990 in this example):
   `./MeasureAccidentals /raid/PLT/SlinkData_2016/Slink_20160514.200310.dat GainCal/GainCalFits_20160501.155303.dat ALIGNMENT/Trans_Alignment_4892.dat TrackDistributions/TrackDistributions_MagnetOn2016_4892.txt 4990`

   Sample invocation for a regular 2015 fill (4444 in this example):
   `./MeasureAccidentals /raid/PLT/SlinkData_2015/Slink_20150930.234122.dat GainCal/GainCalFits_20150923.225334.dat ALIGNMENT/Trans_Alignment_4449.dat TrackDistributions/TrackDistributions_MagnetOn.txt 4444`

   Sample invocation for a VdM scan (scan Y2 from fill 4266 in this example):
   `./MeasureAccidentals /raid/PLT/SlinkData_2015/Slink_20150825.003211.dat GainCal/GainCalFits_20150923.225334.dat ALIGNMENT/Trans_Alignment_4449.dat TrackDistributions/TrackDistributions_MagnetOn.txt 4266 AccidentalStudies/Timestamp_Fill4266_VdMScanY2.txt`

   Running this produces `AccidentalRates_NNNN.txt`, where NNNN is the fill number you specified, as well as a bunch of plots in the `plots/NNNN` directory.

   The format of this file is as follows. First, the total number of data points in the file. Then, for each point, a line of the form:
   begin timestamp,end timestamp,number of triggers,number of total tracks,number of good tracks

   The program will also provide at the end some information about what caused failing tracks to fail. I've saved this information for a few fills in the `AccidentalFails_NNNN.txt` files for reference.

2) Get the CSV file containing the online luminosity from the Conditions DB: go to the FillReport page for the fill, click the ConditionBrowser link at the top, change the start time to the beginning of stable beams, and then plot CMS_BEAM_COND/CMS_BRIL_LUMIPLTZ/LUMI_TOTINST. Save the result as a csv file. If the fill is long, you may need to do this in two separate pieces and join them later.

3) Next, run ParseCondDBData, giving the accidental rate file and the CSV file as arguments. Sample invocation:

   `../ParseCondDBData AccidentalRates_4444.txt Fill4444.csv`

   This will produce an output file CombinedRates.txt. You will also want to rename it to something like CombinedRates_4444.txt. You will also need to make at least one modification: on the first line, add the number of bunches in the fill after the number of data points. There might also be some extra lines after the end of the fill that you may want to trim out (if you do this, don't forget to also change the number of data points).

   The format of this file is similar to the AccidentalRates file, except there are two more fields: the number of online lumi points in this time period, and the total of the online lumi numbers in the time period.

   For some studies I've also made an additional version of the CombinedRates file (the version with `_clean` at the end) in which I've gone through and removed points affected by optimization scans. Similarly, for the VdM and mu scan files, there's also a `_Central` version which only includes the central points of the scans (since the accidental rate measurement becomes unreliable for large beam separation).

4) Finally, plot. To plot a single fill, use `PlotAccidentalRates.C`. To plot a bunch of fills on the same plot, use `PlotAccidentalRatesAllScans.C`. These have been updated to `PlotAccidentalRates2016Single.C` and `PlotAccidentalRates2016.C`, respectively, for the 2016 versions. See those files for specific documentation (there are also a few other plot scripts for miscellaneous purposes).

Commit message:

add Joe's results on accidentals from 2016

AccidentalStudies/README.md, after:

# AccidentalStudies

This directory contains all the results from measuring the accidentals for the 2015 and 2016 runs and the scripts used to plot these results. (The 2016 study for optimizing the mask size with respect to accidental rates is in the `MaskStudies/` directory; see that directory for documentation of that study.) My work (covering 2015 and the start of 2016, up to fill 5013) is in this directory, and Joe's updates covering the rest of 2016 are in the `JoeResults/` subdirectory here. Here's a quick rundown of the basic procedure.

1) Run `MeasureAccidentals`. You need at least five arguments: the slink file, the gain cal fits file, the alignment file, the track distributions file, and the fill number.

   For the 2015 accidental analysis, the gain cal file used was `GainCal/GainCalFits_20150923.225334.dat`, the alignment file used was `ALIGNMENT/Trans_Alignment_4449.dat`, and the track distributions file was `TrackDistributions/TrackDistributions_MagnetOn.txt`. (For magnet-off calibrations, those latter two files were `ALIGNMENT/Trans_Alignment_4341.dat` and `TrackDistributions/TrackDistributions_MagnetOff_4341.txt` respectively.)

   For the 2016 accidental analysis, the files used are `GainCal/GainCalFits_20160501.155303.dat`, `ALIGNMENT/Trans_Alignment_4892.dat`, and `TrackDistributions/TrackDistributions_MagnetOn2016_4892.txt`.

   If this is a regular fill, you don't need a sixth argument; it will measure the accidental rate in five-minute steps. If this is a VdM or other special fill, specify a timestamp file as the sixth argument, so that it will measure the accidental rate for each step of the scan. You can make this timestamp file from a VdM csv file by using `scripts/extractVDMTimestamps.py` on the online machines (although you'll need to edit to remove the separation column, which is included for reference), or just make it by hand (fun).

   Sample invocation for a regular 2016 fill (4990 in this example):
   `./MeasureAccidentals /raid/PLT/SlinkData_2016/Slink_20160514.200310.dat GainCal/GainCalFits_20160501.155303.dat ALIGNMENT/Trans_Alignment_4892.dat TrackDistributions/TrackDistributions_MagnetOn2016_4892.txt 4990`

   Sample invocation for a regular 2015 fill (4444 in this example):
   `./MeasureAccidentals /raid/PLT/SlinkData_2015/Slink_20150930.234122.dat GainCal/GainCalFits_20150923.225334.dat ALIGNMENT/Trans_Alignment_4449.dat TrackDistributions/TrackDistributions_MagnetOn.txt 4444`

   Sample invocation for a VdM scan (scan Y2 from fill 4266 in this example):
   `./MeasureAccidentals /raid/PLT/SlinkData_2015/Slink_20150825.003211.dat GainCal/GainCalFits_20150923.225334.dat ALIGNMENT/Trans_Alignment_4449.dat TrackDistributions/TrackDistributions_MagnetOn.txt 4266 AccidentalStudies/Timestamp_Fill4266_VdMScanY2.txt`

   Running this produces `AccidentalRates_NNNN.txt`, where NNNN is the fill number you specified, as well as a bunch of plots in the `plots/NNNN` directory.

   The format of this file is as follows. First, the total number of data points in the file. Then, for each point, a line of the form:
   begin timestamp,end timestamp,number of triggers,number of total tracks,number of good tracks

   The program will also provide at the end some information about what caused failing tracks to fail. I've saved this information for a few fills in the `AccidentalFails_NNNN.txt` files for reference.

2) Get the CSV file containing the online luminosity from the Conditions DB: go to the FillReport page for the fill, click the ConditionBrowser link at the top, change the start time to the beginning of stable beams, and then plot CMS_BEAM_COND/CMS_BRIL_LUMIPLTZ/LUMI_TOTINST. Save the result as a csv file. If the fill is long, you may need to do this in two separate pieces and join them later.

3) Next, run ParseCondDBData, giving the accidental rate file and the CSV file as arguments. Sample invocation:

   `../ParseCondDBData AccidentalRates_4444.txt Fill4444.csv`

   This will produce an output file CombinedRates.txt. You will also want to rename it to something like CombinedRates_4444.txt. You will also need to make at least one modification: on the first line, add the number of bunches in the fill after the number of data points. There might also be some extra lines after the end of the fill that you may want to trim out (if you do this, don't forget to also change the number of data points).

   The format of this file is similar to the AccidentalRates file, except there are two more fields: the number of online lumi points in this time period, and the total of the online lumi numbers in the time period.

   For some studies I've also made an additional version of the CombinedRates file (the version with `_clean` at the end) in which I've gone through and removed points affected by optimization scans. Similarly, for the VdM and mu scan files, there's also a `_Central` version which only includes the central points of the scans (since the accidental rate measurement becomes unreliable for large beam separation).

4) Finally, plot. To plot a single fill, use `PlotAccidentalRates.C`. To plot a bunch of fills on the same plot, use `PlotAccidentalRatesAllScans.C`. These have been updated to `PlotAccidentalRates2016Single.C` and `PlotAccidentalRates2016.C`, respectively, for the 2016 versions. See those files for specific documentation (there are also a few other plot scripts for miscellaneous purposes).
